AccidentAnalysisandPrevention177(2022)106816
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Accident Analysis and Prevention
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aap
Safe route-finding: A review of literature and future directions
Soheil Sohrabia,*, Yanmo Wengb, Subasish Dasc, Stephanie German Paalb
aSafe Transportation Research and Education Center, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
bZachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA
cTexas State University, 601 University Drive, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: While road navigation systems seek to determine the shortest routes between a given set of origin and destination
Route-finding points, there are certain situations in which the fastest route increases the risk of being involved in road crashes.
Navigation This implies the necessity of integrating safe route-finding into road navigation systems. This study is designed to
Safety
synthesize the literature on safe route-finding and identify the gaps in the literature for future research. Spe-
Safe routes
cifically, a scoping literature review methodology is applied to understand how safety is incorporated in route-
finding, even beyond motor vehicle navigation systems. Three databases (Scopus, Web of Science, and IEEE
Xplore) are explored, and controlling for inclusion criteria, 40 studies are included in this review. The findings of
this review indicated five areas through which safety was considered in route-finding: motor vehicle navigation,
public safety, public health, pedestrian and cyclist navigation, and hazardous material transportation. The
measurement of safety was found challenging with inconsistencies in safety quantification approaches. The safe
route-finding algorithms were investigated based on their predictive/reactive, static/dynamic, and centralized/
decentralized characteristics. Based on the critical review of the safe route-finding algorithms, availability of
real-time data sources, accurate real-time and disaggregated crash risk prediction models, trade-off between time
and safety in road navigation tools, and centralized safe route-finding are highlighted as the requirements and
challenges in considering safety in road navigation systems. This study outlines a research agenda to address the
identified challenges in safe route-finding.
1. Introduction planning features was another significant improvement to in-car navi-
gation. With the introduction of smartphones and navigation apps,
Navigation has a long history that allegedly started with seafaring advanced road navigation systems became nearly ubiquitous. Another
and later found its way into land, aeronautics, or space navigation. In all innovative feature was calculating the travel time based on traffic con-
cases, the navigator’s position was located in comparison to known lo- ditions and directing users to the shortest route, i.e., the route that
cations or patterns, either in the form of dead reckoning or celestial minimizes travel time. The route planning was based on the shortest
navigation. Later, due to limitations in road signage, navigation systems route-finding algorithms (Gallo and Pallottino, 1988). Nowadays, road
naturally became appealing to drivers. The first car navigation system, navigation systems’ route planning goes beyond finding the shortest
which could direct drivers from specific locations on a rolling map, was route, but rather includes the most fuel-efficient and environmentally
introduced in 1909 (Company, 1910). Since then, the car navigation friendly routes (Ding et al., 2017, Holden et al., 2020, Zeng et al., 2017).
system has evolved, and several built-in or nomadic devices have been Since the 1960s, road navigation systems have been considered a
introduced. Not only have the devices themselves been evolved, but also driving assistant technology that promotes safety (Auer et al., 2016).
the capabilities of the system and the algorithms behind it have been The preliminary versions of road navigation systems could provide users
modified. The invention of the Global Positioning System (GPS) in 1973 with turn-to-turn guidance that helped drivers to make safer driving
(Bray, 2014, Canales, 2018), for instance, drastically affected the car (maneuver, lane changing, etc.) decisions. More recent versions of road
navigation industry as the car navigation systems switched from dead navigation systems alert drivers of road dangers such as lane closures,
reckoning to satellite-based navigation (although, evidently, almost two speed limits, flood events, crashes, etc. Despite these advances in road
decades after the introduction of GPS). Adding route-finding and route- navigation systems, safety is not yet considered in route planning.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sohrabi@berkeley.edu (S. Sohrabi).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2022.106816
Received 16 April 2022; Received in revised form 11 August 2022; Accepted 18 August 2022
Availableonline15September2022
0001-4575/PublishedbyElsevierLtd.
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Sohrabi and Lord (2022) designed a study to examine the safety of database that covers more than 79 million records from several areas,
suggested routes by navigation apps and concluded that the fastest route such as life sciences, biomedical sciences, engineering, social sciences,
is not necessarily the safest route. This study showed that an 8% increase arts and humanities, natural sciences, health sciences, engineering,
in travel time could be associated with a 23% reduction in the likelihood computer science, and materials sciences.3
of being involved in a crash (Sohrabi and Lord, 2022). They argued that The databases were searched to identify published and indexed ar-
road navigation seeks to minimize the traveler’s travel time, sometimes ticles, letters, reports, book chapters, and books using any combination
with the cost of navigating them through local roads with poor geometry of a set of keywords in their title, abstract, and keywords. The keywords
design, limited road marking and signage, higher interactions with are summarized into two groups in Table 1. All material considered in
vulnerable road users (cyclists/pedestrians), and higher traffic conflicts, the review was published as of October 2021.
to name a few (Sohrabi and Lord, 2022). After screening the titles and abstracts of the identified records, the
This study is designed to address the gap in incorporating safety in full text was assessed based on the inclusion criteria. The inclusion
route planning by exploring and synthesizing the literature about safety criteria were designed to ensure the literature answers the review
in route-finding. A scoping literature review methodology is employed questions. Three inclusion criteria were defined:
to (1) systematically identify safe navigation systems, their applications,
and the methodologies behind them, (2) classify safe route-finding al- 1. Must discuss safety in route-finding as a system, and studies which
gorithms, and (3) recognize requirements and research gaps for future only discuss route-finding algorithms are not included.
investigations. This review goes beyond motor vehicle navigation sys- 2. Must investigate the route-finding in land transportation as opposed
tems and explores the safety of various types of navigation applications, to aviation and maritime transport.
namely, pedestrian route planning, hazardous material (HAZMAT) 3. Must propose an algorithm or quantification methods rather than
routing, and social safe route finding, with the rationale that safe route- commentary publications.
finding algorithms and methodologies can be transferable to road nav-
igation. As environment-friendly route-finding has eventually found its 3. Results
way after a decade of research, this review is expected to accelerate the
integration of safe route-finding into navigation apps. Such a system can 3.1. Search results
promote safety by preventing crashes and saving lives. In addition, this
study proposes a research agenda for future research on incorporating Overall, 5,955 publications were found–2,246, 989, and 2,720
safety in road navigation systems. Incorporating safety in route finding publications from the Web of Science, IEEE Xplore, and Scopus,
can promote safety by preventing road crashes. respectively. Among those, 40 publications met the inclusion criteria
and were reviewed. Fig. 1 summarizes the implemented scoping review
2. Literature review methodology using the PRISMA scoping review flow diagram (Tricco et al., 2018).
Fig. 2 depicts the annual number of publications since 2010. An
A scoping review framework is employed in this study (the scoping increasing number of publications were observed, which implies higher
review method was previously proposed by Arksey and O’Malley research attention to safe route-finding in recent years.
(2005)). The rationale behind choosing a scoping review is based on the In the subsequent sections, the results of this review are reported,
fact that the safe route-finding literature is broad rather than deep. summarizing the literature based on the definition of safety, the mea-
According to definitions scoping reviews have a larger scope, charac- surement of safety, and the safe route-finding algorithms (Table 2
terized by a broader research question and more inclusive eligibility summarizes the literature).
criteria (Munn and Peters, 2018, Sargeant and O’Connor, 2020). The
scoping review provided a preliminary literature review to identify
areas where there may be a sufficient depth of literature to warrant a 3.2. Definition of safety
systematic review (Sargeant and O’Connor, 2020). This review does not
aggregate, describe the concepts and methods, or assess the quality of The literature shares a common objective: to maximize the safety in
literature, but maps the literature about safe route-finding and identifies route-finding. Nevertheless, the objective of the optimization problem
key concepts, gaps, and limitations (Munn and Peters, 2018). varied based on their definition of safety. The context of safe routing is
The first step in a scoping review is to identify the research question also based on different travel modes. Consideration and context of safe
to be answered (Arksey and O’Malley, 2005). This review aims to find routing for vehicles, non-motorists, and public transportation vary
the answer to the fundamental question: “How is safety incorporated in widely. Safe routing for vehicles mostly depends on time, distance,
safe route-finding literature?” Specifically, this study was interested in safety, and associated critical factors. Safe routing for non-motorists also
identifying the algorithms and methodologies behind safe route-finding. includes time, distance, and safety, however, there is a need for addi-
A search strategy was developed to retrieve relevant research evi- tional information such as walkability and crime scores of the networks,
dence from three electronic research databases—Scopus, Web of Sci-
ence, and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Xplore, Table 1
and reference lists of the retrieved publications. IEEE Xplore is a Keywords summary.
research database that covers more than 5 million journal articles, Category Keywords
conference proceedings, standards, and related materials on multiple
Route- Navigation system; Routing; Phone navigation; Car navigation;
disciplines, including, but not limited to, computer science, electrical
finding Bicycle navigation; Vehicle navigation; Automobile navigation;
engineering and electronics, and allied fields.1 IEEE Xplore is sponsored Pedestrian navigation; Road navigation; Route finding; Path finding;
by the IEEE and other partner publishers. Scopus is Elsevier’s research Road finding; Road guidance; Route guidance; Vehicle guidance; Car
database, which covers more than 75 million records from 50,000 guidance; Navigation device; Route planning; Urban navigation;
Vehicle information system; Navigation device
publishers in four core areas: life sciences, social sciences, physical sci-
Safety Safe; Crash; Collision; Accident; Crime; Hazard
ences, and health science2. The Web of Science, sponsored by the
Institute of Scientific Information, is a publisher-independent research
1 Source: https://innovate.ieee.org/about-the-ieee-xplore-digital-library/.
2 Source: https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/why-choose-scopus. 3 Source: https://clarivate.libguides.com/webofscienceplatform/coverage.
2
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Fig. 1. Study identification and selection mechanism of the implemented scoping review.
trails, bike paths, and sidewalks. Five definitions for safety were found in injury or death (e.g., shooting, sex crime, robbery, etc.) (Galbrun et al.,
the literature: Crime risk, health risk, vehicle crash risk, pedestrian or 2016, Levy et al., 2020, Puthige et al., 2021, Soni et al., 2019, Utamima
cyclist crash risk, and HAZMAT transportation risk (Fig. 3). and Djunaidy, 2017).
The frequency and distribution of the defined categories across the The safe route through which the risk of being exposed to COVID-19
literature is shown in Fig. 4a).4 Roughly 41% of included studies are is minimized was studied in the literature (Mishra et al., 2021, Cantarero
related to the vehicle crash risk, and 21% discussed the pedestrian/ et al., 2021, Khanfor et al., 2020). The general rule to reduce the risk of
cyclist crash risk. The next major category is the crime risk-related exposure to COVID is to maintain social distancing and avoid crowded
studies which account for 25% of total studies. The health risk and communities or zones. Several methods were used in the literature to
HAZMAT transportation risk accounts for 7% of the literature. Fig. 4 (b) identify the high-exposure hotspots and avoid them. Mishra et al. (2021)
depicts an increasing trend in the number of records that vary over time. identified COVID-19 exposure hotspots such as medical zones, high-
Safe route-finding was found in public safety literature. Finding a density residential areas, and roads with a higher potential for connec-
route (mainly in an urban setting) with minimum risk of being a victim tivity of people. Khanfor et al. (2020) developed a pedestrian route-
of a crime is studied in the literature (Utamima and Djunaidy, 2017, finding approach to avoid areas where social distancing is not well-
Byon et al., 2010, Mata et al., 2016, Kaur et al., 2021, Radojiˇci´c et al., practiced. The proposed framework is backed up by the data from
2018, Bura et al., 2019, Soni et al., 2019, Alpkoçak and Cetin, 2020, internet-of-thing devices in smart cities (Khanfor et al. (2020). Cantarero
Levy et al., 2020, Puthige et al., 2021, Galbrun et al., 2016). Mainly, the et al. (2021) defined high-exposure areas as an area with a high density
route with the minimum number of historical crimes was introduced as of population and occupations.
the safest route (Alpkoçak and Cetin, 2020, Byon et al., 2010, Kaur et al., The literature is dominated by studies that explore the route that
2021, Mata et al., 2016). Some studies, however, differentiate the type minimizes the risk of vehicle crashes (Ito and Koji, 2020, Li et al., 2014,
of crimes and target a specified crime for their safe route-finding anal- Sarraf and McGuire, 2018, Abdelhamid et al., 2016, El-Wakeel et al.,
ysis, e.g., robbery (Radojiˇci´c et al. (2018) and crimes that might cause 2018, He and Qin, 2017, Hoseinzadeh et al., 2020, Zhou et al., 2017,
Abdelrahman et al., 2019, Hayes et al., 2020, Krumm and Horvitz, 2017,
Li et al., 2016, Takeno et al., 2016, Kamal Alsheref, 2019, Soni et al.,
2019, Liu et al., 2017, Puthige et al., 2021, Chen and Lou, 2021). The
4 Two studies double-counted in Figure 5a, as they target both crime risk and safest route is usually considered to be the route with lower historical
vehicle crash risk Soni, S., Shankar, V. G. & Chaurasia, S. 2019. Route-the safe:
crash rates (Li et al. (2016), but the severity of crashes was also
A robust model for safest route prediction using crime and accidental data. Int.
considered in some studies. Like the safe routes for vehicles, the safety of
J. Adv. Sci. Technol, 28, 1415-1428;Puthige, I., Bansal, K., Bindra, C., Kapur, M.,
Singh, D., Mishra, V. K., Aggarwal, A., Lee, J., Kang, B.-G. & Nam, Y. 2021. pedestrian and cyclists are studied in the literature. The pedestrian and
cyclist safe route seeks to maximize the safety of pedestrians and cyclists
Safest Route Detection via Danger Index Calculation and K-Means Clustering.
3
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Lozano Domínguez and Mateo Sanguino, 2021). The safe routing for
non-motorists generally considers additional data inputs such as side-
walk presence, the network of sidewalks, trails, and walkability scores.
The risk of crashes has been associated with lighting (Ouyang et al.
(2014) and weather conditions (Shah et al., 2020), among others.
The HAZMAT transportation risk was also included in route-finding
(Eren and Tuzkaya, 2021, Preda et al., 2013). Preda et al. (2013)
developed a HAZMAT transpiration route-finding for various types of
HAZMAT. Eren and Tuzkaya (2021) proposed safe route-finding for
COVID-19-related HAZMAT. The safest route for HAZMAT is usually
considered to be a route with less risk of HAZMAT exposure and
emissions.
3.3. Safety measurement
In the reviewed studies, there is a large variation in how safety is
measured and quantified. In a nutshell, the safety was measured based
on (1) data-driven analyses of the crash frequency, crash rate, or prob-
ability of incidents or crashes, (2) a scoring technique, and (3) safety-
indicator variables as a proxy of risk.
Fig. 2. Publications by year (as of October 2021).
3.3.1. Data-driven measurement of safety
In the first group, historical crash data was commonly used for the
in terms of the risk of road crashes (Santhanavanich et al., 2020, Shah
analyses. Takeno et al. (2016) used the dangerous point and degree of
et al., 2020, Bao et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2014, Yew et al., 2010,
risk to measure safety. The suggested safe route avoids dangerous lo-
Kusano and Inoue, 2013, Chandra, 2014, Shubenkova et al., 2018,
cations with higher crash frequencies. The degree of risk is served as a
Table 2
A summary of the reviewed studies.
Study Definition of Safety Measurement of Safety Algorithm
Predictive/ Static/ Centralized/
reactive dynamic decentralized
(Santhanavanich et al., 2020) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Data-driven Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(Sarraf and McGuire, 2018) Vehicle crash risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Mata et al., 2016) Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Kaur et al., 2021) Crime risk Scoring Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(Radojiˇci´c et al., 2018) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Takeno et al., 2016) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Bao et al., 2017) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Scoring Reactive Static decentralized
(Chen and Lou, 2021) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Khanfor et al., 2020) Health risk Safety indicator Predictive Static decentralized
(Mishra et al., 2021) Health risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Ito and Koji, 2020) Vehicle crash risk Scoring Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(Utamima and Djunaidy, 2017) Crime risk Data-driven Reactive Static decentralized
(Li et al., 2014) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(Cantarero et al., 2021) Health risk Safety indicator Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Shah et al., 2020) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Scoring Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(Abdelhamid et al., 2016) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Preda et al., 2013) HAZMAT risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(El-Wakeel et al., 2018) Vehicle crash risk Safety indicator Reactive Dynamic decentralized
(He and Qin, 2017) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Byon et al., 2010) Crime risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Hoseinzadeh et al., 2020) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Zhou et al., 2017) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Abdelrahman et al., 2019) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Hayes et al., 2020) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Bura et al., 2019) Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Krumm and Horvitz, 2017) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Li et al., 2016) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Kamal Alsheref, 2019) Vehicle crash risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Soni et al., 2019) Vehicle crash risk/Crime risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Eren and Tuzkaya, 2021) HAZMAT risk Scoring Predictive Static decentralized
(Alpkoçak and Cetin, 2020) Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Ouyang et al., 2014) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Safety indicator Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Yew et al., 2010) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Liu et al., 2017) Vehicle crash risk Data-driven Predictive Dynamic decentralized
(Levy et al., 2020) Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Puthige et al., 2021) Vehicle crash risk/Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Chandra, 2014) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
(Lozano Domínguez and Mateo Sanguino, 2021) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Safety indicator Predictive Static decentralized
(Shubenkova et al., 2018) Pedestrian or cyclist crash risk Safety indicator Predictive Static decentralized
(Galbrun et al., 2016) Crime risk Data-driven Predictive Static decentralized
4
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Fig. 3. Risk categories.
Fig. 4. Illustration of grouped safety objectives: (a) Frequency of publications by objectives; (b) Frequency of yearly publications by objectives.
parameter when calculating the cost function of a route development into the reward function of the reinforcement learning algorithm5.
algorithm. Hoseinzadeh et al. (2020) measured safety in terms of Safety is defined as a function of the average distance from previously
average crash number, route volatility, and driving style. They defined known crime spots during the learning step. Based on the crime-related
an impedance index that combines safety and time in route finding. reward function, the reinforcement learning algorithm generates the
Zhou et al. (2017) defined the danger index to represent the collision routes avoiding the crime point. Alpkoçak and Cetin (2020) used the
density of the street and illustrate the danger intensity in a certain street. crime rate to measure and compare the safety of the regions. In this
The danger index is calculated as the count of the collision number research, the crime rate is defined as the ratio of the number of incidents
divided by the street length. Puthige et al. (2021) first defined the crash occurring in the region to the number of populations of this region. Bura
score based on the severity of a crime and then gave each type of crime a et al. (2019) used the number of crime records to measure safety. The
rated weight and further calculated the crime score. The final danger crime records are mapped to the corresponding region and used for
index is used for measuring overall safety. The danger index is defined as finding the route with fewer crime records along the route.
the summation of the crash score and crime score divided by the path More advanced data-driven models estimated the probability of an
distance, and the index is further considered as the weight of a multi- incident using prediction models. Mata et al. (2016) applied the Bayes
objective shortest-path model. Santhanavanich et al. (2020) mapped model to cluster the types of crime. Based on the Bayes clustering
the historical traffic crash data to the geodatabase, then found the high-
risk areas (crash hot spots). The developed route planning algorithm
plans to circumvent these hotspots of the risk area. Utamima and Dju-
5 Reinforcement learning contains several components contains agent, envi-
naidy (2017) defined the dangerous point with a certain radius based on
ronment, state, rewards, policy, and value function. The agent is the decision-
the crime data (i.e., type, location, description). The dangerous area is
maker; Environment is the physical world where the agent learns the action;
further developed based on the crime point and surrounding radius. The
Action is a set of actions that which agent performs; State is the agent’s current
developed route selection algorithm avoids these dangerous zones. Yew
situation; Reward is the feedback that the environment gave to the agent after
et al. (2010) measured safety based on the ratio of the number of re- an action; Policy is the method to map agent’s state to action; Value function is
ported incidents to the amount of exposure. Risk rate can be regarded as the future reward that agent will obtain after a certain action. Reinforcement
a probability and further used in the route-finding algorithm. Hayes learning is a machine learning technique that an agent keeps learning in an
et al. (2020) used the crash rate to represent the safety level. It is interactive environment from the agent’s action based on a series of trial and
calculated as the number of crashes that occur on a given road in the past error methods.
12 months divided by the maximum number of crashes that happened
on a single road in the selected region. The driver customized weight is
applied to the crash ratio and further considered as a part of the cost
function for the route-finding algorithm. Levy et al. (2020) added safety
5
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
algorithm6, the probability of an event occurring on a given day and 3.3.2. Scoring technique
time and at a specific location was calculated. The generated probability In the second group, safety is measured based on a scoring technique,
can be used for measuring safety. Additionally, if there is no available mainly in the form of a scaled value. Kaur et al. (2021) measured safety
crime data in an area, the Bayes model will make an estimation to find based on scoring the relative parameters. Each segment has a safety
the safety points in this area. The weight of these points will be assigned score which ranges from 0 to 15. They defined several rules to change
and serve as the parameters for the safe route algorithm. Radojiˇci´c et al. the safety score for each segment based on the safety-related parameters.
(2018) defined risk as a probability of an event occurring along the For instance, the safety score increases if there is a police station along
defined route. The risk probability changes as the vehicle travel distance the road, or, if a road segment passes through a deserted region, the
increase. The cumulated risk index for a route is formed with various value decreases by two. The safest route includes road segments with
safety-related parameters and travel distance information. This cumu- higher scores. Bao et al. (2017) analyzed the impact of each safety fac-
lated value is included in the objective function, which is used for route tor. After evaluating the impact of parameters, each segment is assigned
determination. To measure safety, Li et al. (2016) and Li et al. (2014) a safety score. The higher the safety score value, the safer a route can be.
defined the risk index as follows: The overall route safety score is the summation of the sub-route safety
∑ score. These safety scores will be served as the weight of the shortest
RRI(i)=F( n ij S j /AADT i ) (1) route-finding algorithm to determine the route. Mishra et al. (2021)
j=1,2,3
measured the safety based on several hazard factors and each hazard
where i is the road segment number, RRI(i)is the risk index for the i factor was assigned a numerical value. Proximity to the containment
th segment, j=1,2,3 denotes the severity level of fatality, injury, and zone was one of the factors considered in this study, and it decreases
property damage only, respectively, nij is the predicted number of levels with every 100 m as the distance increases up to 300 m. The second
j to occur over road segment i in a certain period, Sj represents the cost of hazard factor was proximity to the medical facilities, which is assigned
a crash type, F(•)is a function that scales the cost of most homogenous as 0.08 for the edges with the proximity of 100 m near the medical fa-
segments to an index between 0 and 10, and AADTi represents the cilities and decreases as distance increases. The last hazard factor
annual average daily traffic on the road segment i. The weighted sum of considered was the traffic risk and the betweenness centrality, which
the cumulative travel time and RRIs were used for the cost function for was normalized and scaled into the range of 0 to 0.06 to represent the
safe route-finding. Abdelhamid et al. (2016) estimated the probability of traffic risk. The final safety score was calculated as the summation of all
being involved in crashes based on the characteristics of the road of these factors. Byon et al. (2010) targeted the crime risk and counted
segment and the behavior of the vehicle driver. Abdelrahman et al. the number of death cases associated with each zone. The zone with the
(2019) used the number of crashes, near-crash, and baseline events highest counted deaths received a rating of 5. The zone with the lowest
captured in the driving environment for calculating the probability of death count received a rating of 1. The safest route passes through the
crashes. Krumm and Horvitz (2017) estimated the probability of a zones with lower crime scores. Soni et al. (2019) measured safety using
single-vehicle crash on a certain road segment over a given hour. Then, an overall numeric risk score. Specifically, the crime and crash score for
the crash probability of a route is defined as a set of independent Ber- a certain point was calculated first by assigning the different weights for
noulli trials7, with one trial for the crash road segment. Galbrun et al. different types of crime and crashes. Then, the averaged crime and crash
(2016) assigned a risk score to each edge that is proportional to the were estimated based on all the considered points and regions. The risk
probability of crime events happening on the corresponding road score was further calculated as the summation of the averaged crime and
segment. The spatial density for the crime event is first estimated via the crash score. Shah et al. (2020) targeted pedestrian safety and incorpo-
Gaussian kernel density estimation8, then the estimated density function rated traffic and weather data to measure safety. They defined the safety
is summed up to obtain the crime activity density, which is proportional factor as a scoring value (i.e., High, Medium, Low) based on the traffic
to the probability of observing a crime event on the given edge. The final and weather condition. Eren and Tuzkaya (2021) obtained the Medical
risk score is obtained by normalizing the crime activity density. Liu et al. Waste Management (MWM) safety score (valued between 1 and 10).
(2017) measure the crash probability as: Kamal Alsheref (2019) selected traffic crashes as the safety parameter.
The intensity of importance to safety is measured by Saaty’s 9-point
p(si) =1(cid:0) p(ci) (2) scale9 (Zanakis et al., 1998). Then, the safety intensity was further
Where p(si )is the crash probability of the road i and p(ci )is the crash used in the weight calculation in the route selection algorithm.
probability of the road i. The no-crash probability for the entire route is
estimated as the product of the crash probability of all the segments 3.3.3. Safety indicator
within a route. The safest route score is further determined based on the In the last group, safety is measured based on the indicators of safety.
crash probability of the route; a higher safety score represents a safer Khanfor et al. (2020) measured safety as a part of the weight of edges of
route. the road map graph used for developing the safety route. The safety
weight is a numeric value that combines the impact of the surrounding
co-location/co-work-based relation (CLOR) communities and devices
belonging to the same social friendship and ownership relation (SFOR)
6 The Bayes clustering algorithm is a Bayes algorithm used for the purpose of community of the pedestrian’s device. The SFOR and CLOR can be
clustering. The Bayes algorithm considers specific features that are identified regarded as indicators of safety considering the social distance issue of
and assigned to a specific cluster. Particularly in this research, the clustering COVID-19. Cantarero et al. (2021) developed an approach that identifies
approach obtains some probabilities that represent the estimation for specific the density of citizens and level of occupation and combines this infor-
crimes that were previously classified semantically. Also, the Bayes algorithm mation with the behavior of citizens. The level of danger is defined based
can be used for obtaining a likelihood of an event occurring with several given
conditions based on the Bayes theorem.
7 A Bernoulli trial is a test that can result in one of two outcomes: success or
failure. In one of these trials, "success" indicates you got the result you were 9 Saaty’s 9-point scale is the standard measurement scale used for the analytic
looking for. Here, the “success” trial can be treated as the trial with the crash in hierarchy process (AHP). AHP is considered a multi-criteria decision-making
a single road segment. technique using psychology and math. The steps of AHP include: (1) defining
8 Kernel density estimation is a non-parametric method for estimating an the problem, options, and criteria; (2) Creating a matrix based on the pairwise
unknown probability density function using a kernel function. Here, the comparison; (3) Compute the importance weight of each criterion; (4) Selecting
Gaussian kernel is selected which means the data points follow a Gaussian the best option. Here, the AHP is used for modeling the route selection problem
curve. in a hierarchical form and further recommending the route.
6
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
on vulnerability, transmission risk, and level of occupation. The output decentralized designs. The subsequent sections summarize the literature
of the Danger Model contains a numerical danger index that serves as a based on the characteristics of the algorithms.
measurement of safety. Shubenkova et al. (2018) investigated multiple
safety parameters, including both the objective parameters (e.g., un- 3.4.1. Predictive vs reactive algorithms
regulated crossing) and subjective parameters (e.g., health condition). Route-finding algorithms can be classified according to the reactive
All the safety parameters were given a numerical value and a corre- or predictive nature of the algorithm (Schmitt and Jula, 2006). Fig. 5a
sponding weight. The overall complex indicator was used for measuring shows the frequency of the predictive and reactive algorithms in the
safety by summing up the product of the value of each safety parameter reviewed studies. Predictive algorithms account for 78.05 % of litera-
and its corresponding weight. Ouyang et al. (2014) measured the safety ture, while 21.95 % of the reviewed studies used reactive algorithms. A
of cyclists based on slope, road type, road width, signs on the road, and distribution of predictive/reactive algorithms over time is depicted in
road lighting. Each factor was broken into multiple levels and safety Fig. 5b.
weights are assigned to each level. All weights were set between 0 and 1, The reactive algorithm determines the path based on observed data
with 1 meaning the safest condition and 0 meaning the least safe con- without employing any future information (Schmitt and Jula, 2006).
dition. The single unified safety coefficient was further estimated as the The predictive algorithm employs a predictive model to predict the
product of the weights. El-Wakeel et al. (2018) detected and categorized future conditions of the route. Galbrun et al. (2016) used the gaussian
road surface types and anomalies. The average road quality, which kernel density estimation to estimate the probability of observing the
represents the safety, is labeled qualitatively and further used for route- crime event in the given segment. Krumm and Horvitz (2017) estimated
finding. Rain events on roads were considered a risky situation by Ito the future crash probability via the Bernoulli trials. Mata et al. (2016)
and Koji (2020), and numerical traffic risk, scaled from 1 to 10 to the used the Bayes algorithm to predict the probability of a crime event
roads, was defined on the basis of historical rain events. He and Qin occurring on a given day and time and at a specific location. Abdel-
(2017) incorporated the ratio of the deceleration rate to avoid a crash to rahman et al. (2019) predicted the risk based on the joint effect of
the maximum available deceleration rate as the proxy for traffic safety. detected behavior and environmental context. Besides the conventional
A safety hazard index was further defined for roadway segments and statistical predictive models, the machine learning models can also be
intersections. Chandra (2014) developed crash indicators for cyclists used to predict the safety conditions for the future route. For instance,
and older drivers as a function of traffic attributes such as speed and Levy et al. (2020) developed a deep reinforcement learning algorithm to
density, driver attributes such as perception-reaction time, and street generate the path, indicating the future safety of the route with a given
attributes of length and the tire-to-road friction coefficient. time and start and end points. Also, the input of a predictive algorithm
might contain several safety parameters, and the output will be an
3.4. Route-finding algorithms overall safety index for the segment or the route to represent the safety
(Li et al., 2014, Li et al., 2016, Radojiˇci´c et al., 2018).
The Dijkstra algorithm and its variants were mainly used in the
literature to find the optimal routes (Santhanavanich et al., 2020, Mishra 3.4.2. Static vs Dynamic algorithms
et al., 2021, Utamima and Djunaidy, 2017, Cantarero et al., 2021, Sarraf Depending on whether or not the route-finding system reacts to real-
and McGuire, 2018, Abdelhamid et al., 2016, Byon et al., 2010, Zhou time information, the route-finding algorithm can be divided into two
et al., 2017, Mata et al., 2016, Krumm and Horvitz, 2017, Takeno et al., types: static and dynamic (Schmitt and Jula, 2006, Herbert and Mili,
2016, Yew et al., 2010, Liu et al., 2017, Galbrun et al., 2016). The 2008, Dong, 2011, Khanjary and Hashemi, 2012). Fig. 6 (a) shows the
original Dijkstra algorithm was designed to solve the shortest route- frequency of static and dynamic algorithms in the studied papers. 63.41
finding problem. The cost function is modified to incorporate safety in % of the reviewed studies are static algorithms (Mishra et al., 2021,
route-finding. The modified Dijkstra algorithm aims to minimize the Utamima and Djunaidy, 2017, Sarraf and McGuire, 2018, Preda et al.,
cost function to find the path with the minimum cost from a single 2013, He and Qin, 2017, Byon et al., 2010, Zhou et al., 2017, Mata et al.,
source vertex to all other vertices in a weighted, directed graph. The 2016, Radojiˇci´c et al., 2018, Hayes et al., 2020, Bura et al., 2019, Krumm
inputs for the modified Dijkstra algorithm usually contain a single or and Horvitz, 2017, Takeno et al., 2016, Kamal Alsheref, 2019, Soni
multiple safety-related parameters and the geographic data, and the et al., 2019, Bao et al., 2017, Eren and Tuzkaya, 2021, Alpkoçak and
output usually will be several routes recommendation. Byon et al. Cetin, 2020, Yew et al., 2010, Levy et al., 2020, Puthige et al., 2021,
(2010) modified the Dijkstra algorithm by incorporating safety param- Chandra, 2014, Chen and Lou, 2021, Khanfor et al., 2020, Shubenkova
eters (e.g., crime rate, road slope, scenic view, and elevation of a ground et al., 2018, Galbrun et al., 2016, Lozano Domínguez and Mateo San-
surface) into the cost functions. By minimizing the modified cost func- guino, 2021). The other 36.59 % of the total reviewed publications are
tions, the output of this algorithm is the safest route with less crime and the dynamic algorithms (Santhanavanich et al., 2020, Ito and Koji,
better road conditions. A* algorithm was also utilized in the literature 2020, Li et al., 2014, Cantarero et al., 2021, Shah et al., 2020, Abdel-
with a modified heuristic function (Hayes et al., 2020, Alpkoçak and hamid et al., 2016, El-Wakeel et al., 2018, Hoseinzadeh et al., 2020,
Cetin, 2020). Similar to the Dijkstra algorithm, the input parameters Abdelrahman et al., 2019, Kaur et al., 2021, Li et al., 2016, Ouyang
contain the geographic information for the origin and destination points et al., 2014, Liu et al., 2017, Kusano and Inoue, 2013). Fig. 6 (b) dem-
and the safety-related parameters. onstrates the time series of the publications showing the static and dy-
Another approach for finding the safest route is to rank the shortest namic algorithms. Except for the year 2010, there are both static and
path and its alternatives based on safety (Ito and Koji, 2020, Hoseinza- dynamic algorithms in each year. The difficulties of processing the real-
deh et al., 2020, Bura et al., 2019, Bao et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2017, time data might explain the lower number of publications with the dy-
Puthige et al., 2021, Chandra, 2014). Also, machine learning (ML) can namic algorithms compared to the static algorithms.
be used not only for generating the safety measurement but also for Additionally, the datasets used in the static algorithms and dynamic
predicting a safe route. The deep reinforcement learning algorithm is algorithms are different. Fig. 7 summarizes the datasets used in the
one of the ML-based techniques that was used in the literature to find the literature for static and dynamic route-finding. The datasets can be
shortest path (Levy et al. (2020). The input parameters are usually co- classified into three groups: geographic information datasets, historic
ordinate information about the route start point and endpoint and the datasets, and real-time datasets. The geographic datasets were incor-
safety-related parameters (e.g., crime events, vehicle speed, road con- porated in both static and dynamic route-finding. The geographic
dition). The output of the ML algorithm is the safest path. database includes information about the start and endpoints of the route
The safe route-finding algorithms can be categorized on their pre- and the road network. Geographical datasets are sourced from Open-
dictive/reactive, static/dynamic algorithms, and centralized/ StreetMap, Bings map, and Google map (Santhanavanich et al., 2020,
7
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Fig. 5. (a) Study frequencies by predictive and reactive algorithm; (b) Yearly study frequencies by the predictive and reactive algorithm.
Fig. 6. (a) Study frequencies by static and dynamic algorithm; (b) Yearly study frequencies by static and dynamic algorithm.
Mishra et al., 2021, Utamima and Djunaidy, 2017, Cantarero et al., algorithms (all papers included in this review were using a decentralized
2021, Shah et al., 2020, Sarraf and McGuire, 2018, El-Wakeel et al., algorithm).
2018, He and Qin, 2017, Zhou et al., 2017, Hayes et al., 2020, Bura et al.,
2019, Krumm and Horvitz, 2017, Takeno et al., 2016, Soni et al., 2019, 3.5. Publications after the review time
Alpkoçak and Cetin, 2020, Liu et al., 2017, Levy et al., 2020, Puthige
et al., 2021, Khanfor et al., 2020, Galbrun et al., 2016, Lozano Domí- While missing the most recent publication in review studies is
nguez and Mateo Sanguino, 2021), among others. Besides geographical inevitable, we updated our search with a focus on road safety to include
datasets, the static algorithm also used historical data for safety mea- the most recent literature. As a result, four publications were found
surements. For example, the static algorithm-related studies in the crime (Huang et al., 2022, Sohrabi and Lord, 2022, Jiang et al., 2022) that
risk category used historical crime records (see Fig. 7 for more exam- meet our inclusion criteria.
ples), whereas the dynamic algorithms incorporate real-time data. Huang et al. (2022) proposed a conflict-based approach for travel
Various real-time datasets are found in the literature- namely, the news route safety estimation. This approach measures safety in terms of traffic
websites (Mata et al., 2016, Kaur et al., 2021), the official report (Li conflicts at the road segments and intersections. A dynamic, predictive
et al., 2014, Hoseinzadeh et al., 2020, Li et al., 2016), various sensors algorithm was used in this study. The traffic conflicts are predicted using
and GPS data (Ito and Koji, 2020, El-Wakeel et al., 2018, Abdelrahman machine learning techniques, including road and intersection charac-
et al., 2019, Ouyang et al., 2014, Kusano and Inoue, 2013), and data teristics and dynamic traffic characteristics. The safe route is then found
from APIs (Santhanavanich et al., 2020, Cantarero et al., 2021, Shah using a fuzzy logic method, calculating the risk level of taking a route
et al., 2020, Abdelhamid et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2017). with regards to the intersection and road segment conflict rates.
Sohrabi and Lord (2022) measured safety in terms of the theoretical
3.4.3. Centralized vs Decentralized algorithms probability of being involved in crashes, as a complement of no-crash
Route-finding algorithms can be distinguished according to their (survival) probability. They assumed crash events are a result of a
objectives. In the decentralized algorithm, the decision-making is made Poisson process, and the crash frequency at a road segment can be
by an individual user, and, therefore, the system maximizes the users’ characterized by a negative binomial distribution. The distribution,
benefit (Schmitt and Jula, 2006, Khanjary and Hashemi, 2012). In a which provides the probability of crashes, is estimated based on the road
centralized system, however, the algorithm aims to optimize the benefit characteristics and aggregated traffic conditions. They also developed
of all users (or society) (Schmitt and Jula, 2006, Khanjary and Hashemi, models for adverse and clear weather conditions, which make their al-
2012). The safe route-finding literature is dominated by decentralized gorithm a semi-static, predictive algorithm.
8
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Fig. 7. Datasets used for static and dynamic algorithm.
Jiang et al. (2020) proposed a model that measures the safety of algorithms are static, mainly because of limitations in the availability of
roads, integrating road segment-level crash rates and vehicle-level data for dynamic route-finding. Safe route-finding algorithms can be
conflict probability. Road segment-level crash rates are estimated by based on predicting the state of safety in the system (or route) or
developing the safety performance functions. Vehicle-level conflict observed safety. Reactive route-finding is based solely on the current
probability is estimated using Neural Network, taking into account real- conditions, without insight into future conditions. Predictive routing
time data from driver behaviors, roadway characteristics, vehicle systems, on the other hand, can give insight into the future condition of a
queuing status, distance-related measures, and speed-related measures. road network, but at the cost of extensive prediction modeling. Safe
The safety of the road is further measured as “risk scores,” integrating route-finding algorithms can also be distinguished according to the
crash rates and conflict probability using fuzzy logic. A follow-up study definition of their ultimate goals: a centralized system aims to maximize
by Jiang et al. (2022) complements the dynamic, predictive algorithm benefits for the road network, while a decentralized system aims to
by proposing a heuristic algorithm to solve a real-time routing problem optimize benefits for the individual user. Table 3 summarizes the types
that minimizes travel time while maximizing the average risk score. The of route-finding algorithms for each safe route-finding system.
proposed algorithm is tested using real historical crash data and simu-
lated driver-based data.
4.2. Safe route-finding in road navigation
4. Discussion Safe route-finding algorithms aim to inform users about the safety of
alternative routes between the desired origin and destination. Road
4.1. Lessons learned from the literature crashes are rare events subject to temporal instability (Mannering,
2018), which implies the limitations of solely relying on historical data
This review identified five areas in which safety was incorporated for estimating the risk of crashes. Also, the risk of crashes was associated
into routing problems. The literature about safe route-finding in road with roadway characteristics, weather conditions, user behavior, and
navigation can be traced back to 2014, and since then, not many studies traffic conditions (Petridou and Moustaki, 2000, Lord et al., 2021, Qiu
have targeted this topic. An inconsistency was found in the measure-
ment of safety in the literature. Data-driven analysis of frequency, rate, Table 3
and risk of incidents was widely used in the literature to measure safety. Different types of route-finding algorithms for each safe route-finding system.
Scoring on the basis of ordinal values was another approach to quantify
Definition Dynamic/ Predictive/ Centralized/
safety in the literature. As the measurement of safety can be challenging,
static reactive decentralized
measurable indicator parameters (surrogate safety measurements) were
Vehicle Crash risk Both Both Decentralized
also used as a proxy for safety. The Dijkstra algorithm, with some
Health risk Both Predictive Decentralized
modification, was commonly used to find the shortest route, i.e., the Cyclist/pedestrian Both Both Decentralized
route with minimum risk. Depending on whether or not the navigation crash risk
system reacts to up-to-date information, route-finding algorithms can be HAZMAT risk Static Predictive Decentralized
Crime risk Both Both Decentralized
divided into two types: static and dynamic. Most of the identified
9
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
and Nixon, 2008), which can change over time. As such, safe route- Table 4
finding needs to account for the changes in determinants of crashes Example data sources for safe route-finding.
during the trip and provide insights into the future for both route-finding Data Elements Data Source
and detouring. Ideally, safe route-finding is designed as a dynamic,
Speed Measures
predictive algorithm. A dynamic, predictive algorithm needs to provide
Posted speed limit or travel time State DOT, HERE, SHRP 2-RID
a robust prediction of the risk of crashes in real-time data. Avg. operating speed, percentile speed, & State DOT, INRIX, INRIX XD, HERE,
Switching from reactive to predictive algorithms requires employing speed variance NPMRDS
crash prediction models. Traditional crash prediction models are foun- Continuous 5-minute, 15-minute, hourly,
daily, monthly & annual speed
ded on the assumption that crash events follow a binary trial, and for a
Vehicle trajectory data or waypoint data INRIX, Wejo, StreetLight
large number of vehicles the incidents can be modeled by the Poisson Percent of vehicles exceeding speed limit State DOT
process (Lord et al., 2005). The distribution of crashes during a specific
period of time (usually one or multiple years) was shown to draw from a
Roadway Inventory Data
negative binomial distribution, where the expected value of the distri- Segment length State DOT, HPMS, SHRP2-RID,
bution function represented the expected number of crashes at a specific Number of lanes GoogleEarth
road segment (Lord et al., 2005). These models take into account the Shoulder and lane width
Horizontal and vertical alignment
aggregated environmental, behavioral, and traffic information for esti-
Median barrier
mating the expected number of crashes (Washington et al., 2020), which
Roadside fixed objects (barrier, guardrail,
limits their application for dynamic routing. Real-time crash prediction poles)
models (see (Hossain et al., 2019) for an overview of the models) have Traffic control devices, pavement condition
the potential to update in real-time and take into account the volatility
of traffic. While the majority of these models aggregate the traffic in- Weather Characteristics
formation in small time intervals (Hossain et al., 2019), new models Continuous hourly, daily, monthly and NOAA, Road Weather Information
annual precipitation & visibility data System (RWIS)
have been proposed for vehicle-level crash risk predictions (Basso et al.,
2021). Vehicle-level models would be able to consider user-specific
factors in route selection, namely, driving experience, driver back- Traffic Volume Measures
AADT State DOT, TMAS, HPMS, SHRP2-
ground, and vehicle characteristics, that can elevate the reliability of
RID, StreetLight Data Inc.
risk estimations. Hourly traffic volume TMAS, StreetLight
In the roadway safety literature, crashes are mainly used as a mea-
surement of safety (Lord et al., 2021). Due to challenges in the avail-
Crash Measures
ability and quality of crash databases, surrogate safety measures (e.g., Crash time and date State DOT, HSIS, SHRP2-RID
time to collision and traffic conflicts) were also used as a proxy for road Crash location
safety (Lord et al., 2021). Safety measurement based on scoring, how- Crash type and severity
Crash contributing factors (e.g., speeding)
ever, is prone to subject bias. While a variety of safety measurements can
Lighting and weather conditions
be used to measure the safety of road segments, quantifying the safety of
the route (usually consisting of several road segments) is required for
Real-Time Traffic Data for the U.S.
identifying the safe route.
1.70 million cases (2016–2019) [every 90 s] MapQuest Traffic Application
For safe route finding related works, it is important to develop a Programming Interface (API)
comprehensive database. Two major types of databases are required for 0.54 million cases (2016–2019) [every 90 s] Bing Map Traffic API
incorporating safety in road navigation: 1) road network or road in-
ventory database, and 2) database on operational measures (e.g., oper- Real-Time Incident Data
ating speed, travel time, historical crash or event information on the Crowdsourced data Waze
roadway segment). Table 4 lists the key data elements and potential
sources for each of these data elements. Interested readers can consult
wiper usage, acceleration, deceleration, hard braking, sudden stoppage,
Tarko et al. (2021) for a comprehensive list of emerging data sources for
and near collision. While some of these data sources can report real-time
improving safety (Tarko et al., 2021). Roadway inventory data usually data (to support a dynamic algorithm), MapQuest10 and Bing Map
contains information of roadway features (e.g., segment length, roadbed Traffic AI11 can be used to acquire real-time traffic data. Crowdsourced
width, median type, shoulder type, shoulder width). In many cases, the
databases such as Waze can be potential sources for real-time incidents.
roadway features are provided in separate layers. Many state databases
For safe routing algorithm design, it is necessary to acquire data from
do not provide additional geometric data such as super elevation, curve
both public and private data sources. Table 4 lists some of the key data
radius, and posted speed limit. OpenStreetMap and other private data
elements and related data sources.
vendors (e.g., HERE) can used by researchers to acquire additional
Commercialized route-finding systems are mainly designed to
geometric data. For operation measures, researchers need to acquire
maximize benefits for the user (i.e., minimizing travel time), not for the
data on two major metrics, travel time/traffic volume-related features,
road transport system. To support these systems, a safe route-finding
and recurrent/non-recurrent event-related features (e.g., road in-
algorithm needs to maximize safety at the user level.
cidents). Fig. 8 summarizes the required databases for static and dy-
namic safe route-finding. Some of the potential open-source datasets can
be collected from Departments of Transportation (DOTs), the Highway 4.3. Challenges and future directions
Performance Monitoring System (HPMS), the Highway Safety Informa-
tion System (HSIS), the Roadway Inventory Database (RID) and the Based on the comprehensive literature review and the discussion in
companion Naturalistic Driving Study (NDS) data (from the 2nd Stra- sections 4.1 and 4.2, this study proposes a research agenda for future
tegic Highway Research Program or SHRP2), Traffic Monitoring Anal- research to address the gaps and requirements for developing safe route-
ysis Systems (TMAS), and National Performance Management Research finding algorithms.
Data Set (NPMRDS). Researchers can also purchase or acquire data from
commercial private data vendors including HERE, INRIX, Wejo, and
StreetLight. Some private data vendors (e.g., Wejo) also provide data 10 Source: https://www.mapquest.com/.
from vehicle on-board devices. The data elements include trajectory, 11 https://www.bingmapsportal.com/.
10
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Fig. 8. Static and dynamic safe route-finding data requirements.
The level of complexity and reliability of route-finding varies ac- centralized system can force drivers to take safer routes, which can
cording to the algorithm classifications mentioned above. For example, invade the liberty of users.
dynamic, predictive route finding is a more complex algorithm with a Table 5 summarizes the proposed research agenda.
higher level of reliability compared to static route-finding, but to ach-
ieve reliable estimations of the risk of crashes and, consequently, the 5. Summary and conclusion
safest route, accurate prediction models are required to estimate the risk
of crashes in real-time. Despite the advances in real-time crash predic- This study addresses the gaps in considering safety in road
tion models, more research is required to ensure robust, reliable pre-
dictions. Also, the vehicle-level crash prediction models can elevate the
reliability of safety measurements by including a higher level of gran- Table 5
ularity in risk estimations. Measurement of route safety and incorpo- Proposed Research Agenda.
rating it into route-finding algorithms is another challenge in safe route-
Problem Research Topic
finding algorithms that requires further investigations.
Accurate crash prediction models The safe route-finding algorithm should
For real-time routing, real-time information about traffic conditions,
be designed as a predictive algorithm to
road incidents (e.g., closures due to flooding, crashes, and mainte- account for changes in the risk of being
nance), and weather conditions are required. Such data (traffic condi- involved in crashes. Future research is
tion and road closure) is not publicly available, which makes developing required to improve the accuracy of
dynamic, predictive safe route-finding algorithms challenging. While prediction models.
Disaggregated crash prediction models Developing vehicle-level crash
collecting real-time information about traffic and road conditions can be
for measuring safety prediction models by providing the users
costly, crowdsourced data can be considered an alternative data source with modified information about their
for real-time data (Amin-Naseri et al., 2018, Lin and Li, 2020). trips based on the user’s driving style,
The trade-off between time and safety is critical. In the case the safest historical record of crashes, potential
weaknesses, etc.
route is not consistent with the fastest route, the users face a dilemma
Short duration crash prediction models Developing short-duration (e.g., daily,
about whether to choose the safest route or the fastest one. While the hourly) crash prediction models to
choice between safety and time is subjective to the driver’s sensitivity, it provide more real-time aspects of safety
is expected to affect other road users. Understanding the decision- on the navigation tools.
making process of users (to choose between safety and travel time) Measurement of route safety Introducing new methods to aggregate
road segment and vehicle-level risks at
would help with proactive plans (e.g., educational activities) to promote
the route level.
safety on roads (de Leur and Sayed, 2003). Collecting crash and traffic data in real- Investigate the potential of using
Unlike route-finding based on travel time, a decentralized, safe time to support dynamic, predictive crowdsourced data in safe route-finding
route-finding algorithm can harm other users. Crashes usually involve route-finding algorithms
Trade-off between safety and time Investigate the sensitivity of users to the
more than one vehicle, and road crashes may cause road closure and
risk of being involved in crashes and
traffic congestions that impose delays on other road users. Therefore, travel time
incorporating safety in route-finding and egoism decision-making of Centralized or decentralized navigation Exploring the potential safety impacts of
users can raise ethical concerns. Centralized safe-route-finding algo- system two types of safe route-finding
rithms can address this concern; however, one can argue that the algorithms, centralized and
decentralized, and the
11
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
navigation systems and reviews the existing knowledge around safe Systems with Digital Elevation Models and Crime Rate Geospatial Data. Transp. Res.
route-finding (even beyond road navigation). A scoping review meth- Rec. 2183, 94–102.
Canales, J. 2018. Navigating the history of GPS. Nature Publishing Group.
odology was implemented, and 41 studies were included in this review. Cantarero, R., Rubio, A., Romero, M.J.S., Dorado, J., Ferna´ndez, J., Lopez, J.C., 2021.
Based on this comprehensive review, the gaps in the literature were COVID19-Routes: A Safe Pedestrian Navigation Service. IEEE Access 9,
identified, and an agenda for future research were proposed. Addressing
93433–93449.
Chandra, S., 2014. Safety-based path finding in urban areas for older drivers and
the limitations in the availability of data, developing robust safety bicyclists. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 48, 143–157.
measurement methods, and addressing the potential challenges in Chen, N., Lou, B.N., 2021. A self-driving tour service system based on traffic safety and
increasing safety in navigation apps are highlighted as major needs for accessibility. In: Advances in Transportation Studies, p. 53.
Company, U.S.C., 1910. Cycle Automobile Trade J.
further investigations.
de Leur, P., Sayed, T., 2003. A framework to proactively consider road safety within the
This review has certain limitations. Although safe route-finding has road planning process. Can. J. Civ. Eng. 30, 711–719.
been studied in many domains, the literature about safe route-finding in Ding, Y., Chen, C., Zhang, S., Guo, B., Yu, Z. & Wang, Y. Greenplanner: Planning
personalized fuel-efficient driving routes using multi-sourced urban data. 2017
the context of roadway safety is scarce. We tried to synthesize and map
2017. IEEE, 207-216.
the safe route-finding literature beyond the roadway safety domain to Dong, W., 2011. An overview of in-vehicle route guidance system. Aust. Transp. Res.
identify transferable knowledge and accelerate incorporating safety in Forum.
El-Wakeel, A.S., Noureldin, A., Hassanein, H.S., Zorba, N., 2018. In: IDriveSense:
road navigation. The developed review protocol, however, needs to be
Dynamic route planning involving roads quality information. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
revisited once more studies are available. A scoping review method was Eren, E., Tuzkaya, U.R., 2021. Safe distance-based vehicle routing problem: Medical
used in this study to map the existing knowledge about safe route- waste collection case study in COVID-19 pandemic. Comput. Ind. Eng. 157, 107328.
finding and identify the gaps and challenges in incorporating safety in Galbrun, E., Pelechrinis, K., Terzi, E., 2016. Urban navigation beyond shortest route: The
case of safe paths. Inf. Syst. 57, 160–171.
road navigation. Future studies and systematic reviews are required to Gallo, G., Pallottino, S., 1988. Shortest path algorithms. Ann. Oper. Res. 13, 1–79.
augment understanding of safe-route findings for different modes Hayes, S., Wang, S. & Djahel, S. Personalized Road Networks Routing with Road Safety
(pedestrian, bicyclist, vehicle, and public transport), particularly the Consideration: A Case Study in Manchester. 2020 2020. IEEE, 1-6.
He, Z., Qin, X., 2017. Incorporating a safety index into pathfinding. Transp. Res. Rec.
measurement of safety and routing methodologies. 2659, 63–70.
Herbert, W., Mili, F., 2008. Route guidance: state of the art vs. state of the practice. In:
2008 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. IEEE, pp. 1167–1174.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Holden, J., Reinicke, N., Cappellucci, J., 2020. RouteE: A Vehicle Energy Consumption
Prediction Engine. Society of Automotive Engineers Technical Paper Series.
Soheil Sohrabi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Hoseinzadeh, N., Arvin, R., Khattak, A.J., Han, L.D., 2020. Integrating safety and
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Su- mobility for pathfinding using big data generated by connected vehicles. J. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 24, 404–420.
pervision. Yanmo Weng: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & Hossain, M., Abdel-Aty, M., Quddus, M.A., Muromachi, Y., Sadeek, S.N., 2019. Real-time
editing. Subasish Das: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – crash prediction models: State-of-the-art, design pathways and ubiquitous
original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Stephanie requirements. Accid. Anal. Prev. 124, 66–84.
Ito, S. & Koji, Z. Assessing a risk-avoidance navigation system based on localized
German Paal: Validation, Writing – review & editing. torrential rain data. 2020 2020. EDP Sciences, 03006.
Jiang, S., Jafari, M., Kharbeche, M., Jalayer, M., Al-Khalifa, K.N., 2020. Safe route
mapping of roadways using multiple sourced data. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.
Jiang, S., Zhang, Y., Liu, R., Jafari, M., Kharbeche, M., 2022. Data-Driven Optimization
Declaration of Competing Interest for Dynamic Shortest Path Problem Considering Traffic Safety. IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Kamal Alsheref, F., 2019. Route Recommendation Model Via An Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP). Journal of Advanced Res. Dyn. Control Syst. 11, 17–24.
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence Kaur, R., Goyal, V., Guntur, V. M. V., Saini, A., Sanadhya, K., Gupta, R. & Ratra, S. A
the work reported in this paper. Navigation System for Safe Routing. 2021 2021. IEEE, 240-243.
Khanfor, A., Friji, H., Ghazzai, H. & Massoud, Y. A Social IoT-Driven Pedestrian Routing
Approach During Epidemic Time. 2020 IEEE Global Conference on Artificial
Data availability
Intelligence and Internet of Things (GCAIoT), 12-16 Dec. 2020 2020. 1-6.
Khanjary, M. & Hashemi, S. M. Route guidance systems: review and classification. 2012
No data was used for the research described in the article. 6th Euro American Conference on Telematics and Information Systems (EATIS),
2012 Valencia, Spain. IEEE, 1-7.
Krumm, J. & Horvitz, E. Risk-aware planning: Methods and case study for safer driving
References routes. 2017 2017.
Kusano, S., Inoue, M., 2013. In: Safety route guidance system using participatory sensing.
Abdelhamid, S., Elsayed, S. A., AbuAli, N. & Hassanein, H. S. Driver-centric route IEEE, pp. 363–364.
Levy, S., Xiong, W., Belding, E., Wang, W.Y., 2020. SafeRoute: Learning to Navigate
guidance. 2016 2016. IEEE, 1-6.
Abdelrahman, A., Hassanein, H. S. & Abu-Ali, N. IRouteSafe: Personalized cloud-based S an tr d e e T ts e c S h a n fe o l l y o g i y n ( a T n I S U T r ) b a 1 n 1 , E 1 n – v 1 i 7 ro . nment. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
Alpk r o o ç u a t k e , p A l . a & nn C in e g ti n b , a A se . d S a o f n e r M is a k p p R ro o fi ut le in s g o U f s d i r n i g v e H rs e . u 2 ri 0 s 1 ti 9 c 2 A 0 lg 1 o 9 r . i t I h E m EE B , a 1 s - e 6 d . on Regional Li, Z., Kolmanovsky, I., Atkins, E., Lu, J., Filev, D. & Michelini, J. Cloud aided safety-
based route planning. 2014 2014. IEEE, 2495-2500.
Crime Rates. 2019 2020. Springer, 335-346.
Li, Z., Kolmanovsky, I., Atkins, E., Lu, J., Filev, D.P., Michelini, J., 2016. Road Risk
Amin-Naseri, M., Chakraborty, P., Sharma, A., Gilbert, S.B., Hong, M., 2018. Evaluating
Modeling and Cloud-Aided Safety-Based Route Planning. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 46,
t
fr
h
o
e
m
r e
W
lia
a
b
z
i
e
l
.
i t
T
y
r
,
a
c
n
o
s
v
p
e
.
r
R
ag
e
e
s
,
.
a
R
n
e
d
c.
a
2
d
6
d
7
e
2
d
,
v
3
a
4
l
–
u
4
e
3
o
.
f crowdsourced traffic incident reports 2473–2483.
Arksey, H., O’Malley, L., 2005. Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. Lin, Y., Li, R., 2020. Real-time traffic accidents post-impact prediction: Based on
crowdsourcing data. Accid. Anal. Prev. 145, 105696.
Auer I , n A t. ., J . F S ee o s c e . , R S e . s , . L M oc e k t w ho o d o o d l , . S 8 . , & 19 H –3 a 2 m . ilton, B. A. 2016. History of intelligent Liu, Q., Kumar, S. & Mago, V. SafeRNet: Safe transportation routing in the era of Internet
of vehicles and mobile crowd sensing. 2017 14th IEEE Annual Consumer
transportation systems. United States. Department of Transportation. Intelligent Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), 8-11 Jan. 2017 2017. 299-304.
Transportation.
Lord, D., Washington, S.P., Ivan, J.N., 2005. Poisson, Poisson-gamma and zero-inflated
Bao, S., Nitta, T., Yanagisawa, M., Togawa, N., 2017. A Safe and Comprehensive Route
regression models of motor vehicle crashes: balancing statistical fit and theory.
Finding Algorithm for Pedestrians Based on Lighting and Landmark Conditions. In: Accid. Anal. Prev. 37, 35–46.
IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer
Sciences, pp. 2439–2450. L L o o r z d a , n D o . D , o Q m in í , n X gu ., e G z, e J e . d M ip . a & lly M , S a . t , e 2 o 0 S 2 a 1 n . g H u i i g n h o w , T a . y d s . a J f . e t 2 y 0 2 an 1 a . l W yt a ic lk s i a n n g d S e m c o u d re e : l i S n a g f . e E R ls o e u v t i i e n r g .
Basso, F., Pezoa, R., Varas, M., Villalobos, M., 2021. A deep learning approach for real- Planning Algorithm and Pedestrian’s Crossing Intention Detector Based on Fuzzy
time crash prediction using vehicle-by-vehicle data. Accid. Anal. Prev. 162, 106409.
Logic App. Sensors, 21, 529.
Bray, H., 2014. You are here: from the compass to GPS, the history and future of how we
Mannering, F., 2018. Temporal instability and the analysis of highway accident data.
Bura fi , n D d . , o S u i r n s g e h lv , e M s. . B & a s N ic a n B d o a o l k , s P ( . A P Z r ) e . d icting Secure and Safe Route for Women using Mata A , n F a ., l . T M or e r t e h s . - R A u c i c z . , R M e . s , . G 1 u 7 z , m 1– ´a 1 n 3 , . G ., Quintero, R., Zagal-Flores, R., Moreno-Ibarra, M.,
Google Maps. 2019 International Conference on Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud
Loza, E., 2016. A Mobile Information System Based on Crowd-Sensed and Official
and Parallel Computing (COMITCon), 14-16 Feb. 2019 2019. 103-108.
Crime Data for Finding Safe Routes: A Case Study of Mexico City. Mobile Inf. Syst.
Byon, Y.-J., Abdulhai, B., Shalaby, A., 2010. Incorporating Scenic View, Slope, and Crime 2016, 1–11.
Rate into Route Choices: Emphasis on Three-Dimensional Geographic Information
12
S. Sohrabi et al. A c c i d e n t A n a l y s i s a n d P r e v e n t i o n 177(2022)106816
Mishra, S., Singh, N., Bhattacharya, D., 2021. Application-Based COVID-19 Micro- Shubenkova, K., Boyko, A., Buyvol, P., 2018. The technique of choosing a safe route as an
Mobility Solution for Safe and Smart Navigation in Pandemics. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. element of smart mobility. Transp. Res. Procedia 36, 718–724.
10, 571. Sohrabi, S., Lord, D., 2022. Navigating to safety: Necessity, requirements, and barriers to
Munn, Z., Peters, M.J., Stern, C., Tufanaru, C., McArthur, A., Aromataris, E., 2018. considering safety in route finding. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 137,
Systematic review or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing between 103542.
a systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Med. Res. Method. 18, 1–7. Soni, S., Shankar, V.G., Chaurasia, S., 2019. Route-the safe: A robust model for safest
Ouyang, W., Yu, C.-W., Yu, K.-M., Lin, K.-J., Chang, H.-T., 2014. Safe path planning route prediction using crime and accidental data. Int. J. Adv. Sci. Technol 28,
strategy for bike net. Wireless Pers. Commun. 78, 1995–2007. 1415–1428.
Petridou, E., Moustaki, M., 2000. Human factors in the causation of road traffic crashes. Takeno, R., Seki, Y., Sano, M., Matsuura, K., Ohira, K. & Ueta, T. A route navigation
Eur. J. Epidemiol. 16, 819–826. system for reducing risk of traffic accidents. 2016 2016. IEEE, 1-5.
Preda, A., Ro¨nkko¨, M., Pickl, S. & Kolehmainen, M. GIS-based route planning for Tarko, A. P., Guo, Q. & Pineda-Mendez, R. 2021. Using Emerging and Extraordinary Data
HAZMAT transportation. 2013 2013. Springer, 357-366. Sources to Improve Traffic Safety. 2326-6325, Available: <https://doi.org/10.5703/
Puthige, I., Bansal, K., Bindra, C., Kapur, M., Singh, D., Mishra, V. K., Aggarwal, A., Lee, 1288284317283>.
J., Kang, B.-G. & Nam, Y. 2021. Safest Route Detection via Danger Index Calculation Tricco, A.C., Lillie, E., Zarin, W., O’Brien, K.K., Colquhoun, H., Levac, D., Moher, D.,
and K-Means Clustering. Peters, M.D.J., Horsley, T., Weeks, L., Hempel, S., Akl, E.A., Chang, C., McGowan, J.,
Qiu, L., Nixon, W.A., 2008. Effects of adverse weather on traffic crashes: systematic Stewart, L., Hartling, L., Aldcroft, A., Wilson, M.G., Garritty, C., Lewin, S.,
review and meta-analysis. Transp. Res. Rec. 2055, 139–146. Godfrey, C.M., Macdonald, M.T., Langlois, E.V., Soares-Weiser, K., Moriarty, J.,
Radojiˇci´c, N., Mari´c, M., Takaˇci, A., 2018. A new fuzzy version of the risk-constrained Clifford, T., Tuncalp, O., Straus, S.E., 2018. PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews
Cash-in-Transit Vehicle Routing Problem. In: Information Technology and Control/ (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation. Ann. Intern. Med. 169, 467–473.
Informacine˙s technologijos ir valdymas, pp. 321–337. Utamima, A. & Djunaidy, A. Be-safe travel, a web-based geographic application to
Santhanavanich, T., Wuerstle, P., Silberer, J., Loidl, V., Rodrigues, P. & Coors, V. 2020. explore safe-route in an area. August 01, 2017 2017. 020023.
3D Safe routing navigation application for pedestrians and cyclists based on open Washington, S., Karlaftis, M., Mannering, F., Anastasopoulos, P., 2020. Statistical and
source tools. ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing & Spatial Information econometric methods for transportation data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Sciences, 6. Yew, K. H., Ha, T. T. & Paua, S. D. S. J. SafeJourney: A pedestrian map using safety
Sargeant, J.M., O’Connor, A.M., 2020. Scoping reviews, systematic reviews, and meta- annotation for route determination. 2010 2010. IEEE, 1376-1381.
analysis: applications in veterinary medicine. Frontiers in veterinary science 7, 11. Zanakis, S.H., Solomon, A., Wishart, N., Dublish, S., 1998. Multi-attribute decision
Sarraf, R., McGuire, M.P., 2018. A data driven approach for safe route planning. Int. J. making: A simulation comparison of select methods. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 107,
Appl. Geospatial Res. (IJAGR) 9, 1–18. 507–529.
Schmitt, E. & Jula, H. Vehicle Route Guidance Systems: Classification and Comparison. Zeng, W., Miwa, T., Morikawa, T., 2017. Application of the support vector machine and
2006 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference, 17-20 Sept. 2006 2006. heuristic k-shortest path algorithm to determine the most eco-friendly path with a
242-247. travel time constraint. Transp. Res. Part D: Transp. Environ. 57, 458–473.
Shah, M., Liu, T., Chauhan, S., Qi, L. & Zhang, X. 2020. CycleSafe: Safe Route Planning Zhou, E., Mao, S. & Li, M. Investigating street accident characteristics and optimal safe
for Urban Cyclists. route recommendation: A case study of New York City. 2017 25th International
Conference on Geoinformatics, 2-4 Aug. 2017 2017. 1-7.
13
